Just tell me what Silas is.
Son Silas.
Yeah.
His son.
Silas.
Yeah.
Where'd
you see that note?
It was in
the documents. I don't know what part I saved it on.
Kia ora.
All right. Welcome, Mr Sims. I'm Greg
O'Connor, I'm the chair of the committee, and I'll get the committee
to introduce themselves.
My name's Greg Lim. I'm an MP from Maungakiekie-Tāmaki.
I'm Paulo Garcia, National MP for New Lynn.
Kia ora. Celia Wade-Brown, Green List MP.
All right. And look, thank you for coming for us.
You've
come down from Warkworth, have you?
Yeah.
Yes. And before we start,
sympathy on behalf of the committee for the loss of Silas.
As we read the papers, I think every one of us could fully
understand
just how it must feel at the moment.
So look, if we could hear from you. We've got 10 minutes.
Take your papers as read, but very keen to hear from you.
Yep.
And leave time for questions if you
could.
Yep.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Benjamin Sims. I'm the
petitioner.
I'm not a financial expert. I don't work in these industries.
I'm here through lived experience.
As a programmer, I have over 25 years of experience reviewing
requirements, identifying issues, and delivering solutions.
I have a deep understanding of the technical side of what I'm proposing.
Microphone. Just could-
We are-
... you move the microphone a little bit closer towards. Thank you.
Sorry to trouble you.
We are here today because my son died after he and his mates,
all minors with no fake ID, were sold approximately
62 standard drinks of alcohol in the three hours before his death.
Silas was not blameless in this, but he was failed by the businesses involved,
by the liquor licensing laws, and the banks that handle the payments.
I'm here for his younger brother's mates, who at 15 are
buying vapes from the local shops.
I'm here for all our tamariki who should not be able to buy restricted goods via
bank cards, but can with no friction from the banks.
Because when it comes to anything else,
money laundering, sanctions, fraud, the banks have built
sophisticated systems. But for minors buying alcohol, vapes,
fireworks, 17-year-olds gambling, any age-restricted
product, suddenly we're told the system's very complicated.
The committee has my written submission, so I will not repeat it.
I want to use my time to respond to the four submissions you have received.
I want to start with what the submissions say.
MBIE accepts the petition and raises a legitimate policy issue that some
forms of transaction blocking are technically feasible,
and that policy work will require ministerial direction.
The FMA accepts that issues can be examined from a conduct perspective under
COFI and points to product design pathways under that regime.
The NZBA, while opposing a mandatory regime,
confirms that banks already receive merchant category codes
for MasterCard and Visa transactions.
The Reserve Bank recognizes the importance of this issue.
All four submitters accept the problem is real, the technical
capability exists.
The remaining question is one of policy direction.
Square One, a Kiwi youth money app, blocks restricted merchants by
honest cards by default. Their own marketing asks, and I quote,
"How has no one done this yet?"
Revolut applies the same blocks on its under 18-year-old customer accounts,
and Xnoord Pay, a benefits platform
whose customers include ASB and BNZ,
applies category-based controls on payment cards.
The architecture is deployed. Question is, when will the major
banks implement it?
And the banks themselves have shown they can move quickly when there is a will.
After a ministerial letter in February '24, the entire
industry, all the major banks, rolled out confirmation of
payee code across personal banking.
Just over a year from ministerial direction to a new control deployed at every
major bank in the country. Capability is
not the question. The will is.
The Banking Association's main objection is that minors will simply use cash.
I want to address that briefly.
The petition has never claimed to be a final solution.
It's one additional layer of friction in a system that currently has none
at the payment levelThe Anti-Money Laundering Act
2009 has not eliminated money laundering, yet no one proposes
repealing it on that basis.
The Banking Association's other objection is that supermarkets and other mixed
retailers cannot distinguish between restricted purchases from
ordinary ones. This is not a new problem, and the architecture for
solving it already exists. Visa's own merchant data standards
manuals
require service stations to use two different merchant category codes at the same
site,
one for fuel sold at unattended pumps and another for sales inside the shop.
The same pattern was set out in the UK's 2020 Alcohol Change Report
as a way to handle alcohol sales at supermarkets,
with a till switching to a restricted MCC where an age-restricted item
is in the basket.
The technology is solved. What is missing is the requirement to apply it to
age-restricted purchases.
I want to comment briefly on the Reserve Bank's flippant submission because
it sits in a different category from the other three.
It runs to one page. The central paragraph setting out the
bank's jurisdictional position is nearly identical to the one sent to me in
December 2025,
before my petition was public, before it was delivered to Parliament, before any
request to submit had been made.
Mm.
Its submission acknowledges that merchant classifications already exist, and I
quote, "To implement corporate card controls."
Same banks, same technology, same payment rails.
In use for corporate clients, just not for our kids.
Right.
It also tells us it does not concern itself with the subject matter of
transactions, except in the case of AML/CFT, where Parliament has
specifically legislated it must.
At the same time, the Reserve Bank currently has a public consultation open,
keeping cash local, in which it argues that providing cash services to
customers is a part of a bank's social license to operate in New Zealand.
When the Reserve Bank wishes to engage with banks
to for their customers, it invokes social license.
When asked to look at banks knowingly facilitating unlawful transaction,
it says it's not its concern.
What happened to social license?
One more point I want to put to the committee, which has not been raised in any of
the submissions before you.
Every major New Zealand bank requires the customers in standard terms and
conditions to use their accounts for only lawful purposes.
ANZ's current terms and conditions, published April 26, state, "You
must use any accounts, products, or services for a lawful
purpose." The same ANZ terms apply to business accounts.
Silas was in breach of his contract when he paid.
The businesses that took his payments were in breach of theirs.
The banks have sophisticated transaction monitoring systems for fraud and money
laundering applied to every account.
And looking at my son's transaction history, his spending pattern,
no rent, no wages, no bills, small purchases at the dairy,
school canteen, McDonald's, would have flagged him to any of these
systems as a teenager. The banks have the role.
They already scan for transactions. They have the data.
They have the technology. They have chosen not to connect them.
Before I close, I want to draw the committee's attention to one further matter.
Only four other parties have been invited to submit on this petition, various
regulators of the financial system and the body representing that industry.
But this petition, at its heart, is
not a question about financial regulation.
There's a question about preventing several hundred children and whether the
regulators and financial institutions should continue
to look the other way.
And on that question, the committee has not heard from any public health body-
Mm
... harm reduction organization, youth advocacy group, consumer
protection body,
the hospitality or retail sectors, or any of the frontline agencies that deal with
the consequences when the system fails.
I raise this not as a criticism, but to be clear about whose voices have been
heard. I have raised this concern with the clerk of the committee, and the
committee is aware of this. I only mention it today so it is added to the public
record.
The only voice the committee will have heard on behalf of the young people for
proposed changes intended to protect is
mine. I am the parent of one of those
young people. Silas is no longer here,
so I'm speaking on his behalf
and on behalf of the parents
who have reached out to me and for the other kids this proposal will help.
I would ask the committee to weigh that in balance when considering the submissions
before it and when deciding what further evidence might be needed
before reporting back to the House.
I also want to make one practical offer before I close.
There are several ways banks could implement this.
I'm not looking for a solution. I'm looking for
a will.
I will be happy to join a regulator-led working group as an independent voice to
help work through this situation.
Before I finish, I just want to say something about my family.
Our family was the ordinary Kiwi family, two kids, two dogs.
We surf, fish, hunt, manage the boys' rugby teams, and play
sports.
We pay our mortgage. We pay our company and personal taxes, ACC
levels, council rates. We register and warrant our cars.
We hold up our end of the obligations we have as Kiwis to the government.
We are simply asking the government to ensure that the laws that already exist
are respected and upheld.
If that requires further laws to make those obligations explicit to the
regulators and to the industry, then new
legislation needs to be enacted.
New Zealand has a long history of being world-leading.
1893, we became the first country to give all women the right to vote.
1938, we built one of the first comprehensive social security
systems in the world.We're a small country, but we've not been a follower.
This petition asks the committee to recommend that New Zealand leads once again, to
be the first country to require that payment systems protect our
children from purchases that law already says they cannot
make.
On the night Silas died, they had his age, and they had the merchant category
code.
They authorized the payment.
Thank you, Chair. I'm happy to take any questions
you may have.
Well, I thank you for a very powerful submission.
And can I just say too that the way the committee
works, we get information, and that's not the end of
anything.
What we do is work on the information we get, and then
having heard the submissions, we then decide where we'll go and what we need to
hear from then. So don't think for a moment this is the end
of a process.
No.
This is part of a process.
Okay.
And of course, hearing from you,
initially through your petition and now in person,
gives the committee the opportunity then to decide
what other, or what direction we'll take or who else we need to hear from.
So take that assurance that today is not the end of anything.
No.
Today is particularly a very strong submission-
Mm
... the type that you've made.
Mm.
So members, questions?
No, just Ed, thank you very much. I've sat on
this committee for two and a half years now, that's been the most powerful
submission heard, so thank you.
I'm really keen just to hear why
this can't be done. So-
One, two last things, which I have cleared.
I've asked Anna with,
just so I want to know.
This is what I saw on my son's
statements the day after he died. Like-
Yeah
... it's in black and white, the bank's not.
It's not some hidden piece of data,
it is restricted. It says it. It's restricted.
Mm.
It is.
Thank you very much for,
I mean, it must bring the pain up again to
talk about it, but thank you very much for
trying to step up to help other people.
I just wanted to know, this is not preempting whether we'll
decide to do it or not, but you
mentioned
the Public Health Authority. What were the other ones that you thought it would be
helpful for us to hear from? And then we can have a think about
that.
I think
definitely the police and the
public health authority, they have to deal with--
This is not about just about alcohol.
It's about,
when I referred to flippant for RBNZ,
they added in spray paint
as a fourth.
If that is a restricted item-
Yeah
... then it shouldn't be-
Or nitrous oxide.
Exactly. Like it should-
Yeah
... yeah.
I just think it needs a broad range and it's not just how much is this going to
cost and what's it going to look like to implement.
It's like what, apart from the
benefits, what are the other benefits?
Like it's, was it $9.6 billion the health
department estimates alcohol costs New Zealand a year?
A road death is, I think the NZTA says like
$12.5 million for a road
death.
New Zealand kids have a,
I think 78% are more likely to die in a
road death than
an adult
with drinking involved.
Yeah.
It
doesn't affect one sector. It affects the whole world,
well, whole of New Zealand.
Thank you.
All right. Look, thank you very much, Mr. Giver.
Ask the Banking Association,
New Zealand Banking Association, just to talk on behalf of the
sector, and again, assure you that this is not the end of
anything.
No.
It's very much a part of a process of
the committee deciding
where they go from here.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you again. You've heard our introductions.
I think we've read your submissions, but very keen to
hear from you.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tena koutou.
I'm Roger Beaumont. I'm the chief executive of the New Zealand Banking
Association.
And I'm joined today by our policy director, Sam Shute.
Thank you to the committee for the opportunity to present on the petition from
Ben Sims on payment blocks on age-restricted
purchases for under 18-year-olds.
Let me start by acknowledging the tragedy
of Silas Sims and express,
once again, my sympathy to Ben,
and his family for their loss. This is a truly
tragic situation, and we're very aware of
that.
There's been a significant amount of engagement with Ben,
across the banking sector,
since the tragic accident.
Both banks, Payments New Zealand, and
NZBA have had a large number of meetings and discussions
on this topicAs both an industry
and individually,
banks have given this very complex issue a lot
of thought, and we respect Ben's views
and his desire to see changes
that he hopes would prevent another tragedy like this occurring.
You would've read our submission
on the topic, which represents the industry's collective views after
several months of discussions and engagement with the
industry and Mr. Sims.
And I'll briefly, just to outline what I think are our key
points before opening it up for any questions or discussion.
Mm.
So the first point is about clear accountability.
The accountability for compliance with the law
must lie with retailers to ask for age verification.
Major retailers such as supermarkets have very strict
compliance policies. I'm sure all of us have experienced
purchasing alcohol in a supermarket, and the strict protocols even
for people like me, who are clearly over the age,
have to go through in that circumstance.
Retailers are the ones selling the product, and the onus
must be on them to verify the age of
the purchaser. The sale or-- and supply of
alcohol,
Improving Alcohol Regulation Amendment Bill is currently before
Parliament,
and that could provide robust,
an opportunity for more robust expectations of retailers
in regard to this.
Mm.
Secondly,
effectiveness of the proposal. Look, while we understand Mr.
Sims's view,
we do not believe that the proposal would be
effective in preventing minors from purchasing alcohol.
Minors have always been able to find ways to purchase
alcohol, and the workarounds for this policy
are very easy.
If this policy was in place, young people
would know their card would be declined,
and would either purchase with cash,
use someone else's card, or get someone
older and of age to purchase the
alcohol for them.
The third and final point is that, is about next generation
payments. So developing a card block
system right now is a complex process that
we estimate could take several years to implement.
With each bank needing to defer other work to
develop the functionality to allow that to happen.
And this is especially the case for EFTPOS cards, which
is a much older system than, for example,
credit or debit cards as they currently stand.
Payments New Zealand, which is the industry body that
runs, in simple terms, the payments system and
governs that,
they are working
on a payments modernization program,
Next Gen Payments, which should be able to, once it's in
place, more easily implement these
sorts of initiatives.
The Reserve Bank
has taken the lead on the payments modernization
initiatives,
and that's supported by the Commerce Commission and of course, Payments New
Zealand. So the Reserve Bank-led
workstream is still relatively new,
and there's no current timeline on that initiative.
But we believe that is the most appropriate
avenue to incorporate this program, if that's
what is wanted.
So in conclusion, the banking industry absolutely respects
the views of Mr. Sims,
but we do not believe that a card block would be
effective, and there are better ways to prevent minors from purchasing
alcohol.
So thank you for your consideration, and we're now happy to take questions.
All right. Thank you. Just first question.
Can I just ask, what percentage,
research-wise, of say, younger people now
using cards to purchase versus cash?
What is the industry
sort of knowledge there? Is it anecdotally would be most young
people use cards for most purchases.
Would that be a fair assumption?
Yeah, I think most purchases overall are typically
via a card rather than by cash.
Correct. But cash is a traditional
workaround for people that are wanting to get
around rules and restrictions.
And increasingly, there's a large number
of retail outlets don't take cash.
Now, I wonder what-- have you got any research on that
as to what percentage of retail outlets
now are cashless?
I don't have that information to hand. We could come back to you on that, Mr.
Chair. But it's a very small percentage of retail outlets
that don't take it. It typically tends to be
high turnover service retail environments such as cafes,
for quite low-value transactions often.
But I think I'm not aware of any liquor outlets, for
example, that are cashless.
Well, thank you.
Thank you-
Ms. Wade-Brown
... very useful question, so I'll move on to my next one, seeing as you've
asked one. Great.
The Next Gen Payments work program.
Yes.
Can you give me some
stronger idea of the timeframe of that?
No, I simply can't. I'm sorry, Ms. Wade-Brown,
because that is a piece of work that was
well underway but is now being overseen by the Reserve
Bank. So the Reserve Bank are yet to publish
their timeframes or
any significant detail in terms of how that program of work
will look. But needless to say, it's not going to happen
in an immediate sense and will take some time to implement.
Okay.
Excuse me.
It was useful. I didn't see in detail the statements, but
there were a number of issues that
banks
do pick up. There are
issues when they're trying to help you budget.
I believe that they kind of show what categories different transactions
came in.
Have been somewhat involved in
some of the banks with estimating
the carbon intensity of their purchases with, used to be
Conscious Consumers, I think it's Cogo now.
I don't think we could argue that the banks don't know
what's being bought, could we?
Well, after the fact, they are able to do that analysis in
terms of the example that you're talking about, where you do an analysis
of the types of spending that you're doing.
But that's not necessarily-
You could, and I'm not saying you should, but
would a possibility be that the card
after a purchase that is age restricted,
like alcohol for-
Yes
... a 15-year-old with a card or a 16-year-old.
Would it not be easier,
quite possible to block the use of that card?
Well, no, because that's
something that would need to be built and implemented.
Oh.
So potentially, yes. But if you're talking about
the restriction flag that Ben was referring to
in Silas's bank statement that came up,
that restriction is not flagged at the moment of the
transaction. It's only identified when you
go into, say, your card
statement and click on the link to see what the nature or
detail of that transaction was. So-
I don't understand that. When you make the
transaction, there will be a record that, and it gets
all cleared overnight and so on. But there will be
information go to the bank about that, because otherwise how would they know?
Well, it's known-
Sorry, I used to work in banking. It's quite unknown really.
Yeah, but it's not able to be currently
flagged at the moment of the transaction.
It's a descriptor, if you like, of what the transaction is that the
customer sees-
It's not real time information
... on their statement. It's not, yeah, that's exactly right.
So it gets added, what, at the end of the day, or?
It would depend on the bank's individual systems, but it's something that's there
as a reference point if the customer wants to know more
information about a purchase.
Now, we're assuming, well, just at the moment
we have the opportunity to maybe come back
to some...
Oh, sorry, Greg, you had a question. I'll give you a go.
Yeah, we're digging into the issue arm, Gad, which, I agree with you,
obviously there's no silver bullet.
No.
Appreciate, yeah, that of course.
In Silas's case, the retailers were
entirely culpable. They broke the law.
We're-
And were prosecuted.
Yeah.
Yes.
No, they weren't, actually.
Retailers weren't prosecuted?
They had their license suspended.
Their license conditions were-
Yeah.
Technically, somewhat, they were not prosecuted.
Okay. Yeah, so there's-
So they lost their trading license and they went on
so
Okay.
So essentially what we're looking for is yet another layer, right?
Just as a society, we want to put
every roadblock that we can
in front of young people who haven't yet developed
the risk assessment. And we all
remember those times.
What I think I'm hearing you say is that at the moment, the
technology literally doesn't exist-
Correct
... for this kind of technology, and I see behind you-
Well, well-
... Ben shaking his head. So that's really what I want to get to.
Well, it could be implemented, but
to do it as an industry-wide initiative, so that you
could say that this is rolled out across the industry-
Yeah
... that's a massive undertaking and a massive piece of work and
a massive reprioritization.
Yeah.
And a technical build on... We have 17
members in our organization, 17 member banks.
Yeah.
So a technical rebuild times, well, certainly
13 retail members, so times 13-
Yeah
... for the individual technical requirements
for those banks.
Yeah.
And what we're saying is that there's a complete revamp happening-
Coming, yeah
... of the payment system, which is the next gen that we've referred
to, and we think the obvious and logical way to
put a capability like this-
Yeah
... is into the brief for that new system-
Right
... where all those changes could happen collectively.
Yeah. And what I heard you say is you don't have a timeframe on that yet.
Well, because the timeframe is not in our hands, Greg.
It's-
You got any sort of, are we talking 12 months, two years?
We're talking, no, we're probably talking a few years.
Few years.
Yeah. Yeah.
So then the question, so we're saying that in a few years' time, what Ben's
asking for will be able to be done, particularly if it's now flagged up.
But what we-
Potentially, if it's part of-
Yeah
... the brief for that new system.
Sure. Okay, so that's number one, is we need to make it part of the, well, look
into making it part of the brief.
Yeah.
And then the second thing is just
exploring,
Ben is saying that he believes that it can be done.
You're saying right now, yes, but with significant
cost to the industry for it. So that's really the part that's-
And look, this is not about cost.
Yeah.
This is about the
prioritization-And resourcing to implement.
Yeah.
And actually the
effectiveness of what the end result should be.
Because remember, at the end of the day, accountability
for this lands with the retailer looking in the eyes of the
customer-
Yeah
... and deciding whether they're going to
identify proof of age. That is where the responsibility lies.
And so look, this is a really tough
conversation. I completely understand that.
And if banks could flick a switch and turn this
on, I'm sure all our banks would be willing to do that.
It's just not that simple.
Yeah.
It's a significant technical
stack build that takes a huge amount
of time and resource, which seems to
be a little bit unnecessary
when there is a solution coming that can provide that service and a whole
lot more.
Okay.
Oh, it said restricted purchase. So
is that standard?
So obviously I go into my
credit card and look to see what it is, or EFTPOS,
it'll come up if I've bought alcohol anywhere, will it always be
restricted purchase?
No, it won't, because if you've bought alcohol at the supermarket,
your groceries are not considered restricted purchases, so it won't come
up.
A $200 purchase at Woolworths will not come up as a restricted purchase.
What if I only went in and bought a bottle of wine?
I don't think that would occur either.
What products
... because it's the merchant.
Yeah.
So with Silas's case,
they were able to identify that it was restricted purchase because it was at a
bottle store?
Because that was the-
Yeah
... yeah, the code that was given to that particular merchant.
And is that a decision by the merchant, or is that a
decision by the bank?
I
think that's a decision by the bank.
I'd need to check on that.
It's through the schemes.
It's through-- it's actually-- yes, that's a good point.
It's actually through the
credit or debit card scheme. So typically, MasterCard or Visa-
Yeah
... will determine how that coding works.
And is that designed to protect me
from anyone knowing that I've been buying booze?
Huh.
Uh.
Or porn, or whatever else the restricted
purchase is likely to be. Why is that there?
You would have to ask the schemes what
their objective is with that.
Oh, it's an interesting one.
Yeah.
I'd be keen to know who determines what's a restricted
purchase.
Mm.
And who determines-
Like guns, for example. Yeah. Yeah.
Would a firearm come up as a restricted purchase for that purpose?
Yeah.
Because the reason why I just sort of explore this,
in my day, and we're talking about the old
checks, the good old checks. Because if I ever went
in with a check to buy
booze-
Yes
... or something, the
bank would be, well, I mean, to make sure to protect the
retailer, to protect themselves from being ripped off by a
dud check,
is going to
make all sorts of requirements, ID, et cetera.
Whereas now
with a card, while the retailer will be making sure,
protecting themselves legally,
actually as long as there's enough
money and the card goes through, then that's implied that,
well, it's not implied, that there is funds there, it will be paid.
But once again, the legal responsibility in that
moment lies with the retailer to determine that you're
of a legal age to purchase what you're purchasing.
It's not the financial institution's obligation.
And society puts the obligation on the retailer at the
moment.
Well, the law puts the obligation-
The law does, yeah
... on the retailer.
And obviously what we're talking about here is the law putting some-
Yeah.
All right. No, you've clarified some things here.
Members, any other questions?
Thank you. All right. That's it. There was for the moment.
It may well be on our discussion we come back and ask some more questions, I think.
And we invite you for anything that you'd like to seek
clarification on.
It's been a very interesting discussion about this whole where the
point of
responsibility lies. Yeah.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
Thank you committee.
Yeah.
Yeah. And Mr. Simms, was there anything?
I'd just invite you back to the table just to, oh,
you did. I noticed you were-
I just, yeah
... you were exercising considerable restraint, so I'd-
Thank you
... give you the opportunity.
I'd just like to point out two things.
So the MCC codes are
universal around the world. They're not Visa, they're not MasterCard.
So these are the codes around restricted purchases, are they?
So everything, every-
Retailer
... when you use your EFTPOS card anywhere, every single merchant has
a MCC code, and so there'll be
florists,
retail, hardware.
And so everybody fits it. So an MCC code's basically an industry code.
Classification. It's a classification of your business.
Right.
Yeah.
So that's
a point. They're not specific to New Zealand.
They don't get made up for New Zealand.
Um,
and in terms-
So what's the
relationship between those codes and the restricted purchase codes?
Do they come under those codes?Oh, okay.
Yeah. So you'll have alcohol
outlet, which is known to be restricted.
So who-- I think the question is who determines what is a restricted, which of
those MCC codes get flagged?
They don't... Every,
Silas' account is not on my Kiwi Bank one.
They don't show them. So you might not see them when you look at
your card. Your-
Yeah, but on Silas'. So when you went in to dug into Silas'
card, this came up as a restricted purchase.
Yeah.
What the question I was seeking is that, is that a standard or is that-
Yeah, it would be a standard. So if you went to the same shop, you would get
restricted purchase.
But it's determined by the retailer? By the bank?
No, by the
acquiring,
like Wind Cave or Payment Express, by the
merchant-
The point of sale
... that does the transaction,
the company that does the transaction.
Yeah. I'm still not quite understood. So I've got a bottle store.
Yeah.
Right? And I've-
I've
... and next door I've got a dairy.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Which is quite common, actually, so they'll be different businesses.
Yeah.
So if I buy a bottle of wine,
and then later on it'll come up as restricted purchase, but if I go
next door and buy milk and bread-
It's a convenience store or whatever the MCC code is-
Okay
... is for that.
But who determines then-
Like the store
... like the, who determines that it'll come up as a
restricted purchase?
Well, that's tied to the MCC code. So the convenience store,
they have a
code and a label.
Yeah. It's-
Yeah. Sorry, I might be being a bit obtuse.
I just can't work out that with Silas, you opened his-
Yeah
... he, not everyone who made the same
purchases at different stores would necessarily have come
up with restricted purchase. So point by-
Yeah. Every, everybody that-
Buys alcohol
... on that store.
And that's-
That retailer is restricted. It's not-
Well, at that one or the one, other one down the road.
Sure, but it wasn't the connection between, there wasn't anything in the system
that was going, "This is a minor."
No.
Yeah.
No, it's a standard.
Just a retailer.
Yeah.
Okay.
And the others, so I just might have an answer to the-
Sorry, it's just that I think the size of it.
Yeah, but it's, it's, uh-
Just we just need that in the microphone. Thanks.
Just I think, just so I understand. It's complex.
It's, yeah, it's the categorizing of the merchant, not the product.
Yeah.
So if the merchant is a supermarket, and I think
the intention of most of this information is sort of data so that they could show
back for sales and that sort of stuff.
Or as the RBNZ said, for corporate card control.
Yeah.
So it's the merchant, not the product.
Yes. That's the key thing. So that's why
Liquorland that only sells alcohol-
Yeah
... is flagged as an alcohol retailer and therefore maybe
a reason why the restricted bit comes in, whereas a supermarket would not
be flagged as, and get that flag because it's a supermarket-
Right
... where you can buy a whole bunch of different things. It's not product specific.
Okay.
Just and I, yeah.
But, okay, so then who determines
what's in, what's out?
In terms of whether it's restricted or not?
Yeah.
That's not something up to the bank.
Don't know if anyone knows the exact answer on that one.
Well, I think that's quite key to-
Yeah
... probably quite key to this, finding that out.
So-
I think the thing I suggested-
Could you come back to it?
Yeah.
Okay. Could you come back to us on that and find out who determines that
the liquor store is in, but the
dairy is not.
Oh, yeah. Well, that's the categorization of the-
The international
... merchant. So it's because it's a liquor store only selling liquor,
basically, that's why it's flagged as that.
Well, there'll always be every liquor store, specialist liquor store.
Exactly. Specialised.
Or tobacconist.
Yeah.
Yeah. So that's why they're kind of, because there are restrictions around
purchases, I think that's why they're flagged like that.
Whereas obvious, whereas you're not going to flag a convenience store
as a restricted base because they sell majority other things.
All right. So if we, because this is important-
Yeah
... because if we recommended, so if,
Silas had bought his booze at the-
Supermarket
... supermarket, it wouldn't have come up.
No.
As the-
That sort of-
Nothing would
No, he wouldn't be able to at the supermarket. Yeah.
Yes. Well, exactly. It's a bank, it's having-
Yeah
... excellent controls in place.
Yeah.
Yes.
All right.
So it would be possible to make...
I mean, and again, there is nothing that's going to do 100%, so I'm
not saying, but it would be possible to
block
purchases by an under 18-year-old at
a certain category of business rather than what--
So-
Yeah.
Yes
... if a 16-year-old goes and buys a packet of crisps
or chippies-
Or chips
... at
a liquor store, they might be declined.
I'm just imagining-
Technically it's illegal for them to go into one
... but if they went to a supermarket, it would be fairly tight.
And frankly, dairies have been tightened up so much
about selling alcohol over the last few years.
One of the bigger problems is the fact that there isn't a flag of the age
of the person with the card system itself.
So that's why a block is- That was the- ... more complex that way ...
my second- Yeah, yeah ... second thing I was coming to, like in the payment
flow, all the data is known.
But not all the pieces of data might be given at each
step. But at any point in the payment flow-
Mm
... there is all the pieces of data.
So all, when it says impossible or it's very, very difficult,
all the data's there, they just have to be connected.
Yeah.
As a programmer-I know that. It's not rocket
science.
All right. Look,
sorry, we've got some other people-
We can come back to you
But if there's anything else, feel free.
If there's anything else you think we should know just before you do finish, we're
happy, but we'll just-
I'm happy to answer any questions via email or
All right. No, this has been...
Sorry, if I can just add one point just in terms of that point about the
proof of age, just to be really clear.
So the age, your age, is not
held in the detail of your credit card when you're making a credit card
purchase. Your bank knows your date of birth, but that's kept in the
customer relationship management, which is a separate
system, that that information is not
exchanged with your card
and certainly not linked at a point of
purchase. So,
that is the complexity of the various
points of information being exchanged with each other.
It's not integrated in that sense currently. All right.
Look, thank you. And it may well be in our discussions we do decide we do need
a little bit more, but this has been a-
One tonal extra thing.
I would imagine that the
bank sensation would've been sitting here in 2005, 2007,
arguing exactly the same thing about the AMFL, AML,
CFT, counter-terrorism. It's nothing to do with us. We're just handling the money.
We shouldn't have to worry about where the money came from.
It's the same thing.
Point well made. All right, look, thank you very much,
everyone.
Probably one of our more informative sessions we've
had. So we certainly
go into our discussions much better informed than we went in.
So thank you very much for your flexibility in
allowing us to
dig deep.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
Thanks